---
layout: post
date: 2019-01-01
title: "2019"
description: "Setting some goals for 2019."
categories: blog
tags:
- personal
- habits
- health
---

With 2018 in the rear view, it’s time to set some goals for 2019.

Here are some things I want to focus on, and some markers to aim at by year end.

### Health

* **Run 500 miles** — At just under 10 per week on average, this feels achievable, but will require consistency. A fall off the track will be hard to catch up from. I’d like to do some races in here, also.
* **Eat better** — Nothing specific here. More cooking at home, more plants, less grease/fat, less quantity, more fish, more variety.
* **Meditate 10 minutes per day, 5 days per week** (a total of 43 hours) — I’m enjoying this so far, want to get it closer to an automatic habit. It’s always something I enjoy having done _once it’s done_, but I don’t always look forward to it yet. As I’m learning, mindfulness practice can be frustrating once you know what you’re supposed to be doing.

### Reading, Learning, and Writing

* **Read 50 books** — I did almost this many this year. It’s doable.
* Learn and do some **work with R**.
* Get **better with SQL**.
* Keep working on **cartography** and keeping up with **open source geo** (QGIS, PostGIS, OpenStreetMap)
* Continue writing every day, **365 posts**. Combining this with the reading habit is working well. I like using the process of writing “reviews” of books as a way to digest and think about what I read. If I could put together a full year streak, I’d be elated.

### Professional

* Go big with **[Fulcrum Community](https://www.fulcrumapp.com/community/ "Fulcrum Community")** — We have some plans in store for this. Exciting to think about; time to execute.
* **Launch two new products** — Good progress here already, will be bringing them public probably midway through the year.
* **Improve our product narratives** all around — This goes for internal and external purposes.

### Other

* **Take the kids on a trip**, just the family — Not sure where, but somewhere out west would be fun.
* **Buy a new house** — Working on this now. Kind of a big deal, but we’ll see!

I’m planning on putting together a tracking tool so I can keep myself honest on progress. I’ll publish something on that in the coming weeks once I get it figured out. I’ll also put some reminders on the calendar to revisit my progress here on the blog once a quarter.

Now time to go read.
